---
title: Indic Computing is not only Localization
author: Santhosh Thottingal
type: post
date: 2009-07-07T00:00:00+00:00
draft: true
url: /?p=189
categories:
  - Misc

---
It has been around 3 months since I touched [dhvani][1] code.
  
Why?
  
No. Project is not orphaned. I have too many items in the roadmap of the project.

Then?  The fact is , since it has to support many Indian Languages,  and since I don&#8217;t know much about languages other than my mother tongue, I am facing difficulty in proceeding. Unless the language modules are tested and improved to a reasonable level of quality,  some of the items in roadmap does not make any sense.

There are many people interested in project, and I get mails from them often. But  what I really want is developers, who know the language well.  But unfortunately there are problems in that.

It is not only about dhvani project, It is a general fact that very few developers are intersted in Indic computing.  There are hackers who are very good in Indic computing. But they are already overloaded.

So what is stopping new developers to come to this field?

The term &#8216;indic computing&#8217; is less highlighted so far. Very few people are aware of what it is, what are the projects coming under that, what skill are required etc.  On the otherhand the term &#8220;Localization&#8217; is often heard. The reason is many languages in India have only localization community. For some languages, the community is not big and main activity happening is translation.  Interestingly the term localization is used for all other projects done for language. Have a look at the localization track presentations by language communities during the last Indlinux meeting. Spellcheckers, Fonts, Machine Translation, Rendering, TTS, OCR..  all labled under localization. IMHO, for people outside, this makes an impression that , it is only about translation.. and yeah..it is not for geeks.. Geeks work with projects like linux kernel, debian, gnome, KDE, Firefox&#8230;

There are some projects that can be done only by Indians(people who know our languages very well). And It is Indic Computing. And it is more or less challenging as any other main stream foss projects. Not forgetting the importance of translation, but we should understand it is not only the thing to do with our language. People who are doing localization should not remain in that step for a long time. They should move forward with the aquired language knowledge to more challenging fields.

 [1]: http://dhvani.sourceforge.net